---
source: Manual of Veterinary Clinical C - Leslie C. Sharkey.pdf
pages: 419
converted: 2026-02-03 21:44
part: chunk_002
estimated_tokens: 3987
---


Reference intervals are generated by measuring an analyte in the blood of a population of
apparently healthy animals. The mean value is calculated, and the reference range is set as the
mean plus or minus two standard deviations if the data are normally distributed. The practical
consequence of this is that approximately 5% of “normal” patients will have results that fall
outside of the reference interval (Figure 1-1). For example, the statistical probability that a
completely normal patient will have all normal results on a serum biochemical profile
containing 12 tests is only 54%!


Figure 1-1. How reference
intervals are calculated: In this
example, serum sodium was
measured in 43 normal dogs. The
number of dogs with each sodium
concentration is indicated by the
bars. The mean (heavy dashed line)
and reference interval (lightly
dashed lines or ± 2SD) are
calculated. Notice that values from
2 of 43 normal dogs are outside of
the reference interval. You can
expect 5% of normal patients to
have a serum chemistry value that
falls outside the reference interval.





2. Accuracy and precision in the laboratory.


Accuracy and precision are required to ensure that abnormal values truly reflect the status of
the patient and are not the result of poor laboratory technique. Accuracy is the agreement
between the laboratory result and its “true” value, and precision is the agreement between
replicate measurements (Figure 1-2).





Figure 1-2. Accuracy and precision.




3. The probability of disease being present in a patient with an abnormal test result also
depends on the sensitivity and specificity of the test and the prevalence of disease in the
population.


Diagnostic sensitivity is a measure of the frequency of a positive or abnormal test result in
the presence of disease.


Diagnostic specificity is a measure of the frequency of a negative or normal test result in the
absence of disease.


While sensitivity and specificity reflect the accuracy of a test, they are determined using
highly selected populations (all diseased for sensitivity or all free of the disease for
specificity). The clinician is probably more interested in the positive predictive value of a test,
which is the percentage of patients with a positive test that actually have the disease.
Positive predictive value takes into account the prevalence of the disease. Be aware that tests
are often evaluated at universities or large referral centers, where the prevalence of disease
may be quite different from your clinical practice.


4. Laboratory artifacts or errors in the collection and processing of samples may cause a
normal patient to have abnormal laboratory data. It is beyond the scope of this book to list
all possible artifacts and errors, however these should ALWAYS be considered when the
laboratory data seems incongruous with the clinical presentation of the patient. Hemolysis,
icterus, and lipemia of samples may cause artifactual abnormalities of laboratory tests due to
interference with test methodology. Leaving serum samples unspun may result in
hypoglycemia due to in vitro consumption of glucose by cells in the blood sample. Leakage
of electrolytes or enzymes out of cells and into serum may also be a problem. Collection of
samples soon after eating can result in lipemia or elevation of serum glucose, cholesterol,
and triglycerides. Certain types of medications may have physiological effects that result in
laboratory abnormalities, or they or their metabolites may directly interfere with assay
methodology.


5. Normal clinical chemistry profiles do not rule out disease. In some cases, laboratory
parameters only become abnormal very late in the course of disease (i.e., they lack
sensitivity). Good examples of this are BUN and creatinine, which only become elevated
when approximately 75% of renal function is already lost. In other cases, the routine clinical
chemistry profile does not contain good tests for disease. For example, there are no tests
specific for pulmonary or cardiovascular disease on routine serum biochemical profiles,
although hypoxia or hypoperfusion may cause secondary abnormalities that are detected by
performing a serum biochemical profile.


Step 2: Group analytes into meaningful categories for
interpretation
Many clinical chemistry profiles have their individual tests already grouped in some logical
order on the report, often according to organ system. Some laboratories offer mini-profiles at
lower cost that are specific for liver or kidney disease. It is often helpful to generate your
own lists of tests to evaluate as a group when trying to rule out certain problems. For
example:


Renal Disease Liver Disease Electrolyte Disturbances Hydration Status
BUN Bilirubin Sodium Packed Cell Volume
Creatinine ALP Chloride Total Protein
Phosphorus GGT Potassium Albumin
Calcium ALT/SDH Anion Gap BUN/Creatinine
Sodium Albumin Bicarbonate Urine Specific Gravity
Chloride Cholesterol Physical Exam
Postassium Triglycerides
Bicarbonate
Albumin
Amylase
Urine Specific Gravity


Evaluation of laboratory data is similar to the approach to the physical examination, taking a
history, or evaluation of radiographs. It is not so important exactly what approach you utilize,
as it is to develop a consistent method with which you are comfortable. A thorough and
methodical approach will ensure that nothing is missed, and the process will become more
efficient, which is always important in busy practices.


Step 3: Integrate the clinical chemistry data in the context of
clinical information
If your patient has clinical chemistry abnormalities, but appears healthy, follow the outline in
Figure 1-3. Interpretation of some laboratory data as normal or abnormal depends on clinical
information. For example, isosthenuria in a well-hydrated patient that just consumed a large
amount of water may be normal. Isosthenuria in a dehydrated patient that is also azotemic
indicates the potential for significant impairment of renal function. Hyperglycemia in a calm
cat is more suggestive for diabetes mellitus than hyperglycemia in a cat that is growling,
hissing, and swatting at anything that moves in the examination room!


All possible causes of deranged laboratory data should be considered on the initial list of
differential diagnoses, however some can likely be ruled out based on history and physical
examination findings, while the remainder can be prioritized as more or less likely based on
clinical information. Using the example of feline hyperglycemia, a thin cat with a history of
polyuria/polydipsia and weight loss is more likely to have diabetes mellitus than a cat with a
similar degree of hyperglycemia that was anxious during the clinic visit but has no clinical
signs or history compatible with diabetes.


Step 4: Try to explain all problems and abnormalities of
laboratory data with one primary problem.
This is a standard technique for developing diagnoses for patients. Keep in mind that
occasional patients, particularly geriatric ones, may have more than one primary problem. To
quote Dr. Bob Hamlin at The Ohio State University, “just because you have a headache, it
doesn’t mean you can’t have diarrhea.”


In most cases, complexities in blood work merely reflect problems that occur secondarily to
the primary process. For example, liver enzyme elevations or urinary tract infections may be
associated with diabetes mellitus. Many diseases may result in laboratory evidence of
dehydration (increased packed cell volume, total protein, and/or albumin). Animals that have
been hit by cars may have elevations of liver enzymes because of traumatic hepatocellular
damage or hypoperfusion secondary to shock without primary liver disease.


Step 5: Use the clinical chemistry profile to guide the choices of
further diagnostic work up.
Achieving an accurate diagnosis for a patient almost always requires a combination of clinical
history, physical examination findings, some type of laboratory work, imaging studies, and
possibly other testing. The serum biochemical profile may show evidence of a problem, for
example electrolyte disturbances, and then the clinician must review clinical data for a cause.
Based on the history and physical, the veterinarian may choose to perform imaging of the
abdomen, a parvo test, an ACTH level, or other tests to help determine the underlying
problem.


The sensitivity and specificity of many tests are improved by performing them on the
appropriate population of patients. For example, 95% or more of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have increased ALP. Because dexamethasone suppression and ACTH stimulation
testing can be difficult to interpret, a practitioner can maximize the performance of these
tests by performing them on “high risk” patients with appropriate clinical signs and
laboratory data that also suggests the likelihood of hyperadrenocorticism.


Laboratory and clinical data can also aid in prioritizing possible diagnostic procedures when
there are financial limitations or when some testing options are more invasive than others.
For example, hyperthyroid cats often have increased liver enzymes, but no primary liver
disease. As a result, if a cat is losing weight, is tachycardic, and has a palpable nodule in its
neck, it may be more appropriate to run a T4 level than to schedule a liver biopsy.


Step 6: Practice!!!!


Abnormal result on apparently normal patient


Re-run the sample to
verify the abnormality















Figure 1-3.




**This page intentionally left blank**


# Chapter 2

##### Liver Enzyme Elevations


Hepatobiliary disease can be difficult to diagnose because it often presents with nonspecific
signs such as depression, weight loss, anorexia, diarrhea, and vomiting. Laboratory testing
can be performed to determine if liver disease is the cause of these clinical signs, however
interpretation of the results can be complicated because no consistent laboratory
abnormalities are found in all patients with liver disease, and extrahepatic problems can also
result in laboratory data that can be compatible with hepatobiliary disease.


The following are general tips to guide the interpretation of liver enzymes:


1. Elevations in serum enzyme activities are relatively sensitive but not specific for
liver disease.


2. A thorough review of the patient history for medications, metabolic disorders, or other
extrahepatic processes that could induce liver enzymes should be completed prior to costly
or invasive work ups for primary liver disease.


3. Severe liver parenchymal loss can occur, yet liver enzyme concentrations in the circulation
may be within normal limits.


4. The degree of enzyme elevation is not always prognostic, but often reflects the severity of
insult and the numbers of cells affected.


5. Liver enzyme activity in the blood cannot be used to evaluate hepatic function. Serum bile
acids or blood ammonia levels are generally recommended.


6. There may be discordance between the degree of enzyme elevations and the severity of
histologic changes reported in biopsy specimens. Biochemical abnormalities may occur
without morphologic changes in the hepatocytes that are observable at the light microscopic
level. Conversely, enzymes may not be elevated despite marked parenchymal loss if active
hepatocellular leakage is no longer occurring, for example with cirrhosis.


7. Decreases in liver enzyme levels in the blood over time may indicate improvement in the
underlying disease, resolution of the enzyme-inducing process, or scarcity of viable
hepatocytes. Liver enzyme activities below the reference interval are generally not
considered to be diagnostically significant.


8. Various other laboratory abnormalities in the complete blood count, coagulation tests, and
the serum biochemical profile may be present depending on the type, extent, and duration
of liver disease.


9. Once extrahepatic causes for liver enzyme elevations have been ruled out clinically or by
the use of further laboratory testing, liver enzyme values can be used to categorize the
general process as:


- Hepatocellular damage (increased serum ALT, AST in small animals; increased serum SDH,
AST in large animals)

- Cholestasis (increased serum ALP, GGT, bilirubin in small animals; increased serum GGT,
bilirubin in large animals)

- Decreased liver function (increased serum bile acids, bilirubin, ammonia or fibrin
degradation products; prolonged PT or PTT, decreased serum albumin, cholesterol, urea,
glucose)

- A combination of the above.


It should be recognized that hepatocellular damage will lead to swelling of hepatocytes and
secondary cholestasis, and that bile acids accumulating during cholestasis are toxic to
hepatocytes. Either chronic or severe hepatocellular damage or cholestasis can ultimately
impair liver function. The primary process is often reflected by relatively greater deviations in
laboratory values than the secondary processes, but late in the course of the disease, it may
not be possible to determine the initiating cause. While blood tests can suggest that hepatic
disease is likely, a specific diagnosis almost always requires cytology or biopsy of liver tissue.


Guide for Evaluating the Cases in This Chapter


Review medication history, physical examination findings, and laboratory data to rule
out extrahepatic conditions listed in Table 2-1


_Hint! Not all of the patients presented in this chapter have hepatobiliary disease._
#### Step 1


If hepatobiliary disease is the cause of laboratory abnormalities, decide which
processes are likely to be occurring in this patient: hepatocellular damage,
cholestasis, and/or decreased liver function. Additional tests of liver function may
be needed.
#### Step 2


When possible, determine which process is the predominant one: hepatocellular
damage, cholestasis, or decreased liver function.

#### Step 3


Choose appropriate additional testing as needed to determine a specific diagnosis.


_Hint: Remember that the liver is integrally involved in hemostasis! Don’t forget to_
_evaluate coagulation status prior to invasive procedures such as biopsy._
#### Step 4


#### Table 2-1



Some extrahepatic causes for increased concentrations of
serum liver enzyme levels or bilirubin



Drug Induction
Corticosteroids (canine): ALP, GGT, ALT, AST
Anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone): ALT, ALP, AST, GGT
Endocrinopathies
Hyperthyroidism (cats): ALP, ALT
Hypothyroidism (dogs): ALP
Diabetes mellitus: ALP
Hyperadrenocorticism (dogs): ALP, ALT, GGT, AST
Hypoxia/Hypotension: ALT, ALP, GGT, AST, LDH
Secondary to damaged bowel, toxic enteritis: ALT, AST, SDH
Muscle damage: AST, ALT (if severe), LDH
Neoplasia (primary or metastatic)
Increased Bone Remodeling (rapid bone growth, neoplasia, osteomyelitis): ALP (bone
isoform)
Other
Systemic infections
Hemolysis: Bilirubin
Pregnancy (cats): ALP (placental isoform)
Colostrum fed neonates (dogs, lambs, calves): GGT
Pancreatitis
Anorexia: bilirubin (indirect) in horses


Liver Case 1 – Level 1
“Spunky” is a 10-week-old male Rottweiler puppy presenting for unproductive retching after
which he “coughed” up a small piece of glass. He has had no diarrhea and has been
appropriately vaccinated. Spunky is bright and responsive in the examination room and has
good body condition. No abnormalities are found on physical examination.


White blood cell count: 10.8 x 10 [9] /L (4.9-16.8)
Segmented neutrophils: 6.2 x 10 [9] /L (2.8-11.5)
Band neutrophils: 0 x 10 [9] /L (0-0.3)
Lymphocytes: 3.8 x 10 [9] /L (1.0-4.8)
Monocytes: 0.5 x 10 [9] /L (0.1-1.5)
Eosinophils: 0.3 x 10 [9] /L (0-1.4)
WBC morphology: Appears within normal limits


Hematocrit: 28% (39-55)
~~↓~~
Red blood cell count: 4.14 x 10 [12] /L (5.8-8.5)
~~↓~~
Hemoglobin: 9.2 g/dl (14.0-19.1)
~~↓~~
MCV: 67.0 fl (60.0-75.0)
MCHC: 33.0 g/dl (33.0-36.0)
RBC morphology: Appears within normal limits
Platelets: Clumped, but appear adequate in number